[Music]
fifteen spanish-american war
the declaration of war against Spain
adopted by Congress on April 20th 1898
can be attributed to a variety of real
and imaginary factors among the real
considerations were American sympathy
for the Cuban revolutionaries waging war
against their colonial oppressors 1868
through 1878 sugar interests in Cuba and
outrage over the tactics of general
valeriano butcher weyler and his
concentration camps among the imaginary
subjects were all of the propaganda
targets of William Randolph Hearst
New York Journal and Joseph Pulitzers
New York world the sinking of the
battleship USS Maine in Havana Harbor on
February 15th set the wheels in motion
for a culmination of declared war two
months later the formal resolution
adopted by Congress won recognized the
independence of Cuba to demanded the
withdrawal of the Spanish armed forces
from that island three authorized the
President to utilize the Army and Navy
to carry out this policy and four
disclaimed any American interest in
controlling Cuba or its people the
United States entered the hostilities
with a modern steel Navy of 2,000
officers and 24,000 enlisted men the
army by contrast consisted of an
ill-equipped 2100 officers and 28,000
enlistees Colonel Arthur L Wagner chief
of the military information division
counseled the president and the cabinet
against an immediate invasion of Cuba
for reasons of weather and disease
control his advice won him the enmity of
his Overlord Secretary of War Russell a
Algar cost him his job and caused him to
be denied a promotion and rank until he
lay on his deathbed
there were however a number of
successful intelligence operations
carried out during the war among the
first of these was a mission by
lieutenant Andrew s Rowan a former
military attache in Chile and once in
charge of the military information
divisions map section who at the request
of the president was directed to carry a
series of questions to the elusive rebel
leader Calixto Garcia somewhere in Cuba
after finding Garcia Rowan was to
determine quote the numbers location and
morale of the Spanish troops the
character of their officers the
topography the condition of the roads in
all seasons how well each side was armed
and what the insurrectos were most in
need of until an American force could be
mobilized end quote to his great credit
and the gratitude of the War Department
Rowan completed the mission popularly
captioned a message to Garcia a series
of similar missions were carried out by
Lieutenant Victor blue the executive
officer of the gunboat suwanee at the
time of the undertaking the first
venture blue made into enemy territory
was prompted by a need to know where a
shipment of arms ammunition and
provisions under escort by the Suwanee
and destined for guerrilla forces was to
be landed a second mission came at the
urging of Admiral William T Sampson
commander of the Caribbean fleet who
having blocked Santiago Harbor wanted to
determine how much of the Spanish fleet
lay at anchor within the port blue was
required to make a deep-penetration of
long duration into the Cuban countryside
much of which afforded him little
protection from detection by patrols and
a third trip blue returned to observe
Santiago Harbor for purposes of
informing sampson of channel
obstructions port defenses and ship
positions relative to an attack on the
facility an unusual officer of
demonstrated abilities blue advanced
quickly in rank by the end of World War
one he was a Rear Admiral served as
chief of staff of the Pacific Fleet and
was chief of the Bureau of navigation
retired in 1919 he died in 1928 a secret
agent using the name Fernandez del Campo
was dispatched to Spain by the War
Department during the hostilities of
1898 footnote the actual identity of
this agent supposedly has never been
disclosed but the source discussing his
activities has suggested that he might
have been lieutenant colonel Aristides
Moreno an American intelligence officer
of Spanish descent who was in charge of
counter espionage matters on General
John J Pershing's staff in France during
World War one see Rouen and dined or fir
page seven one nine and footnote
quote stopping at the Capitals best
hotel he made no advances and presented
no letters of introduction but let his
dislike of the Yankees be understood and
gave it out that his visit to Madrid
must be brief members of fashionable
clubs military officers and officials of
the government met him accepted his
casual invitations were sumptuously
entertained and also enriched by one who
lost money at cards with the insouciance
of inherited manners and income end
quote
the man carefully and cleverly
maneuvered himself into favour with
Spanish officials and naval personnel
was shown the armaments munitions and
stores of their fleet observed the Cadiz
dock yards and Arsenal and learned both
the departure date and destination of
the Armada the last item being the
purpose of his mission Admiral George
Dewey and his forces around the
Philippine Islands were alerted that
they were the target of this Spanish
flotilla and the spy returned safely to
the United States for private honors the
Signal Corps was an established entity
within the Army when the declaration of
war against Spain was ratified at the
time the unit's duties were quote to
establish and maintain enter
communication between the territorial
components of the nation by submarine or
Overland Telegraph and telephone with
its armies in the field wherever they
may be located
between the subdivisions of its armies
in camp and campaign and in battle by
visual signals and by flying or
semi-permanent telegraph and telephone
lines and the gathering of such valuable
military information as its command of
the channels of communication may make
possible as its duties indicate its work
embraces the construction and operation
of all military telegraph and telephone
lines the manipulation of submarine
cables the operation of captive balloons
visual signaling and telegraph
censorship end quote immediately prior
to entering the war the Signal Corps
consisted of approximately eight
officers and fifty enlisted men this was
quickly expanded to about 150 personnel
pending the organization of a volunteer
corps congressional approval for a
volunteer Signal Corps occurred in May
1898 and the regular ranks of the unit
eventually reached 1300 men the Signal
Corps performed important intelligence
service in three instances during the
spanish-american war the first of these
exploits involved severing these
submarine cables serving Cuba thereby
isolating the island for purposes of
communication and utilizing the detached
lines at other terminals beyond the
island for our own purposes in 1898 five
submarine cables connected Cuba with the
continents to ran between Havana and
punta Raza Florida one connected
Santiago with Haiti and thence to New
York or to South America and two linked
Santiago with Kingston Jamaica where one
line continued on to the Bahamas and
halifax and the other skirted the coast
of South America to Pernambuco and ran
on to the Canary Islands and then to
Lisbon the Florida cables presented no
problem as the United States controlled
the terminals and allowed some
communications of a supposedly
non-military nature to flow between Cuba
and Florida quote to Colonel James Allen
United States volunteer Signal Corps was
entrusted the task of severing Cuba tell
graphically from Spain and rearranging
the cables for American use the ship
Adria was immediately chartered in New
York and the cable machinery of the
Mexican Telegraph Company secured and
installed in the ship which proceeded to
Boston and took on 24 miles of deep sea
cable furnished by the Western Union
Company and then returning to New York
took on 29 miles of intermediate type
cable and 50 miles of insulated but an
armored wire with instruments and
supplies and proceeded to Key West
without having attracted the attention
of the press end quote
after a great deal of difficulty with
the ship's crew and his own technicians
assigned to the mission Allen could
recruit only three signal sergeants a
detail of 10 artillery volunteers from
the garrison at Key West barracks an
assisting Signal Corps officer and a
motley ship's crew of those under this
direct command only one had been to sea
previously and none of them had ever
seen a submarine cable the adri arrived
off the coast of Santiago on the
afternoon of June 1st and began dragging
for the cable within the three-mile
limit which was well within the range of
Spanish shore batteries this proximity
was necessary because the cables not
being the property of Spain they could
legally be severed only within the
jurisdiction of the nations at war
ie within three miles of the coast of
their territory this position also
contributed technical difficulties to
the mission as submarine cable was
armor-plated where it became subject to
coastal tides currents and frictional
contact with the ocean bottom
the Adria's machinery for lifting the
cable almost proved impossible for the
task the cable was snared and lost
relocated and finally surfaced by
straining hoists and coughing motor
police the Adria was fired on by shore
batteries a few times but the mission
was finally completed Allen and his
group also assisted in making the cable
between Santiago and Haiti operational
free
it states forces after it was severed by
a party aboard the st. Louis
these actions not only isolated the
Spanish forces on Cuba from ready
communication with points beyond the
island but gave the United States almost
total control of cable communication
around the theater of war
another important accomplishment of the
Signal Corps was the reporting of the
arrival of Admiral Pasquale Cervera atop
its squadron at Santiago within two
hours after it entered the harbor while
the Spanish fleet was known to have
departed for the Caribbean its mission
was unknown would it attack the United
States coast would it immediately engage
in a sea battle with American ships
blockade in Cuba would it attempt to
refuel and drop supplies at a Cuban port
and what harbor would it utilize even
the Army was afraid to dispatch troops
to Cuba for fear of having these forces
caught in transports by the unlocated
Spanish flotilla on May 19th
after eluding the blockading American
forces Cervera unobserved on the open
sea entered Santiago Harbor one hour
after the fleet made port details about
its arrival and Composition were
dispatched to Washington from Key West
by Colonel James Allen quote no
confidence is violated in now telling
that the information regarding sir
Vera's squadron came to Colonel Allen
through an employee of the cable company
at Havana who was in the pay of the
Signal Corps all the information about
cervera came from Santiago over the
Cuba's submarine cable on the south
coast to the captain General at Havana
and Colonel Allen's agent obtained it
from quote a Spanish government official
holding a high position and quote ten
days after its arrival the Spanish fleet
came under blockade in the harbor when
ships under admiral sampson arrived off
santiago the situation remained static
until july 3rd when Cervera attempted to
make a dash for the sea in a four-hour
battle along the Cuban coast the Spanish
ships succumbed to superior American
firepower the fleet was destroyed
474 Spanish seamen were killed and
another 1750 were taken prisoner
American forces counted one dead and one
wounded on July 17th the Santiago
garrison surrendered resulting in
another 24,000 prisoners the destruction
of the Spanish fleet marked the virtual
end of the war the signal cores third
intelligence effort derived from its
mission of communications control and
duty as sensor quote whose purpose was
not to restrict the press or to muzzle
the people but to thwart treason and to
prevent news of military and naval
operations from reaching Spanish
territory to the injury of the American
cause end quote
quote the lines constructively seized by
the Signal Corps
at the order of the president embraced
the land lines of Florida the seven
submarine cables to foreign countries
having their termini in New York City
the French Cable on the south coast of
Cuba the English cables in Puerto Rico
and Santiago and the Cuba submarine
cables end quote the Signal Corps did
not actually displace any personnel
operating these lines but instead
assumed supervision of operators and
messages in each case the signal officer
attached to each station assumed some
responsibilities as a censor while the
chief signal officer held final
authority on such questions not all
communication was prohibited over these
cables and in fact a certain amount of
intelligence derived from allowing
personal and commercial traffic quote
all telegrams in Spanish - and from
Spain Cuba Haiti Puerto Rico Jamaica and
st. Thomas were prohibited as well as
all messages in cipher to any foreign
country except that the right to
communicate in cipher was allowed the
legal diplomatic and consular
representatives of neutral foreign
governments personal and commercial
messages in plaintext were admitted when
deemed advisable and when not containing
military information as it was the
purpose of the chief signal officer to
exercise the necessary military censor
with the least possible inconvenience to
legitimate commercial business thus it
happened that throughout the war
messages pertaining to domestic or
commercial affairs were passed freely
over the lines to Havana and even to
Santiago much information of inestimable
value was gleaned from a perusal of
messages which were attempted to be
passed by Spanish agents blockade
runners newspaper correspondents and
unfriendly or neutral persons the
movements of Spanish ships the plans of
blockade runners and the presence and
doings of Spanish agents were thus
discovered and watched by accepting
messages of treasonable character and
quietly dropping them in the wastebasket
the sources of the information were not
alarmed and repeatedly furnished to the
United States valuable intelligence end
quote
the first efforts at establishing peace
were made through the French ambassador
at Washington shortly after the defeat
of the Cerveris squadron a protocol
signed on August 12th provided for a
peace treaty to be concluded in Paris
and halted hostilities under the terms
that one Spain was to relinquish Cuba
and cede Puerto Rico and one of the
ladrones to the United States to
American forces were to continue to hold
Manila and three occupation of Manila
would continue until a peace treaty was
concluded determining the disposition
and control of the Philippine Islands
the Paris treaty was finalized on
December 10th ceding the Philippines
Puerto Rico and Guam to the United
States calling for a payment of twenty
million dollars for the Philippines and
effectively establishing Cuba as a free
nation the treaty came to the United
States Senate for ratification and a
close division between imperialist and
anti imperialist factions left its
adoption in doubt for a few months
finally on February 6th 1899 it was
accepted on a 57 to 27 vote a to vote
confirmation margin the war was over
[Music]
this is our hidden history
you